---
layout: post
title: "Hello, World"
date: 2011-04-17 12:58
comments: true
categories:
---

Hi, I'm Andrew and this is my first blog post.

<!-- more -->

Since everybody seems to have a blog these days, I figure it's about time I
jumped in as well. I've thought about doing it several times, but I tend to get
plagued by procrastination fairly often.

I happen to be a programmer, which makes it fairly easy to think of topics.
I've played around with a few different technologies, though I'm mostly focused
on Ruby these days. I'm also a sworn Vim user and I think I'll be starting off
with that. When it comes to Vim, it's impossible to know absolutely everything,
so I'm thinking my knowledge will probably be useful to someone out there.

I highly doubt I'll be having any readers outside of Bulgaria anytime soon (if
ever), so if you're reading this, you might be wondering why I chose to write
in English and not in Bulgarian. Well, for one thing, it feels natural in this
context. Most programming languages out there have English words as the base of
their syntax. When we write comments in our code, we do it in English, we write
documentation in English... Personally, I just find it difficult to put my
thoughts about programming in writing using anything else.

Another, more pragmatic reason is that sometimes, I find useful information
within blogs that are in different languages. One post about Ruby and GTK comes
to mind that was in Spanish, which I really don't know, and going through
Google Translate takes a lot away from the content. Even if my blog is never
read by foreigners, I hope to write some useful tidbits every once in a while,
and I'd hate to leave out the option of people from all over the world finding
them. That's a great part of the fun in posting on the Internet, after all --
having some guy from around the globe comment on that nifty Vim mapping you
explained about.

So, hello, World, hope we get along well. I'll try to get started with some
actual content real soon now.
